SOURCE: https://www.kra.go.ke/business/companies-partnerships/companies-partnerships-pin-taxes/company-partnerships-types-of-taxes

Types of Taxes - KRA --> --> Home Individual PIN Registration Learn about KRA PIN --> About PIN Tax Obligations Requirements for Registration PIN Dormancy PIN Cancellation How to Print Your PIN Certificate. How to Register for a KRA PIN [Individual.] How to Register for a KRA PIN [Non-Individual.] How to Deregister your PIN as a Foreigner Requirements for PIN Deregistration of a Deceased Person Filing & Paying File & Pay --> Individual Income Tax Pay As You Earn (PAYE) Withholding Tax Tax Compliance Certificate (TCC) Installment Tax Advance Tax Rental Income Tax Capital Gains Tax Value Added Tax (VAT) Turnover Tax (TOT) Importing & Exporting Learn about Importation & Exportation --> Procedures for Motor Vehicle Other Goods How to Import Customs Bonds Special Needs Learn About Tax Exemption --> Persons With Disability Alternative Dispute Resolution(ADR) Learn About ADR --> About ADR Why ADR? Disputes appropriate for ADR The ADR Framework ADR Application Form Diaspora Affairs Learn about Kenyans Living Abroad --> KRA PIN & Tax Obligations Guidelines for Returning Residents Importation Diplomatic & First Arrival Privileges Legacy Ledger Reconciliation Migrated Ledger Balances --> Background of the Legacy Tax System How to Access the Migrated Data and Adjusting the Migrated Balances How and Where to get Support/Assistance Migrated Legacy System Credit Balances How to Re-validate and Reconcile Migrated Legacy System Balances Requirements for Taxpayer Reconciliation of Legacy System Ledger Balances Next Steps After Validation of Legacy System Ledger Balances Business Companies & Partnerships Taxation for Companies & Partnerships --> PIN Registration Types of Taxes Filing & Paying Taxes Incentives & Exemptions Importing & Exporting Import & Export Procedures Excise Duty Legacy Ledger Reconciliation Compliance & Penalties Learn About Compliance --> Tax Compliance Certificate Offences & Penalties Not-For-Profit Taxation for Not-For-Profit Organisations --> PIN Registration Types of Taxes and How to Comply Societies Taxation for Societies --> PIN Registration Types of Taxes Filing & Paying Taxes Incentives & Exemptions Authorized Economic Operators (AEO) Learn About AEO --> About AEO Benefits of AEO Eligibility & Getting Certified Alternative Dispute Resolution Learn About Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) --> About Alternative Dispute Resolution Why Alternative Dispute Resolution Disputes Eligible for ADR The Alternative Dispute Resolution Framework Apply for ADR eTIMS Learn About eTIMS --> What is eTIMS Types of eTIMS Solutions eTIMS System to System Integration How to Onboard on eTIMS Install eTIMS Buyer Initiated Invoicing eTIMS Contact and Support Details eTIMS Fuel Station System eTIMS Tutorials Investors Incentives & Certification Investing in Kenya --> Investment Certificate PIN Registration Investing in Kenya --> Local Investor Foreign Investor Tax Obligations Investment Procedures Investing in Kenya --> Procedures for Investing in Kenya Agents Customs Agent About Customs Agent --> Customs Agents Customs Agents Roles Become a Customs Agent Customs Licence Renewal Tax Agents About Tax Agents --> Who is a Tax Agent? Role of Tax Agents Become a Tax Agent Deregistration & Cancellation Online Services About Us E - Procurement Careers Publications News Centre KESRA Contact Us Your Location: --> A --> A A A About Us E - Procurement Careers Publications News Centre KESRA Contact Us Home Individual PIN Registration Learn about KRA PIN About PIN Tax Obligations Requirements for Registration PIN Dormancy PIN Cancellation How to Print Your PIN Certificate. How to Register for a KRA PIN [Individual.] How to Register for a KRA PIN [Non-Individual.] How to Deregister your PIN as a Foreigner Requirements for PIN Deregistration of a Deceased Person Filing & Paying File & Pay Individual Income Tax Pay As You Earn (PAYE) Withholding Tax Tax Compliance Certificate (TCC) Installment Tax Advance Tax Rental Income Tax Capital Gains Tax Value Added Tax (VAT) Turnover Tax (TOT) Importing & Exporting Learn about Importation & Exportation Procedures for Motor Vehicle Other Goods How to Import Customs Bonds Special Needs Learn About Tax Exemption Persons With Disability Alternative Dispute Resolution(ADR) Learn About ADR About ADR Why ADR? Disputes appropriate for ADR The ADR Framework ADR Application Form Diaspora Affairs Learn about Kenyans Living Abroad KRA PIN & Tax Obligations Guidelines for Returning Residents Importation Diplomatic & First Arrival Privileges Legacy Ledger Reconciliation Migrated Ledger Balances Background of the Legacy Tax System How to Access the Migrated Data and Adjusting the Migrated Balances How and Where to get Support/Assistance Migrated Legacy System Credit Balances How to Re-validate and Reconcile Migrated Legacy System Balances Requirements for Taxpayer Reconciliation of Legacy System Ledger Balances Next Steps After Validation of Legacy System Ledger Balances Business Companies & Partnerships Taxation for Companies & Partnerships PIN Registration Types of Taxes Filing & Paying Taxes Incentives & Exemptions Importing & Exporting Import & Export Procedures Excise Duty Legacy Ledger Reconciliation Compliance & Penalties Learn About Compliance Tax Compliance Certificate Offences & Penalties Not-For-Profit Taxation for Not-For-Profit Organisations PIN Registration Types of Taxes and How to Comply Societies Taxation for Societies PIN Registration Types of Taxes Filing & Paying Taxes Incentives & Exemptions Authorized Economic Operators (AEO) Learn About AEO About AEO Benefits of AEO Eligibility & Getting Certified Alternative Dispute Resolution Learn About Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) About Alternative Dispute Resolution Why Alternative Dispute Resolution Disputes Eligible for ADR The Alternative Dispute Resolution Framework Apply for ADR eTIMS Learn About eTIMS What is eTIMS Types of eTIMS Solutions eTIMS System to System Integration How to Onboard on eTIMS Install eTIMS Buyer Initiated Invoicing eTIMS Contact and Support Details eTIMS Fuel Station System eTIMS Tutorials Investors Incentives & Certification Investing in Kenya Investment Certificate PIN Registration Investing in Kenya Local Investor Foreign Investor Tax Obligations Investment Procedures Investing in Kenya Procedures for Investing in Kenya Agents Customs Agent About Customs Agent Customs Agents Customs Agents Roles Become a Customs Agent Customs Licence Renewal Tax Agents About Tax Agents Who is a Tax Agent? Role of Tax Agents Become a Tax Agent Deregistration & Cancellation Online Services EN SW --> --> --> --> --> Home&nbsp/&nbsp Business&nbsp/&nbsp Taxation for Companies & Partnerships&nbsp/&nbsp Types of Taxes --> Taxation for Companies & Partnerships print PIN Registration Types of Taxes Filing & Paying Taxes Incentives & Exemptions Importing & Exporting Import & Export Procedures Excise Duty Legacy Ledger Reconciliation 1. Income Tax Income tax is a tax charged for each year of income, upon all the income of a person whether resident or non-resident, which is accrued in or was derived from Kenya. Income Tax is imposed on; Business income from any trade or profession Employment income Rent income Dividend and Interests Pension income Income from a Digital Marketplace Natural resource income among others There are different methods of collecting income tax from companies & partnerships, based on their sources of income. These methods include: a. Corporation Tax This is a form of Income Tax that is levied on corporate bodies such as Limited companies, Trusts, and Co-operatives, on their annual income. Companies that are based outside Kenya but operate in Kenya or have a branch in Kenya pay Corporation Tax on income accrued within Kenya only. Do partnerships pay corporation tax? b. Pay As You Earn (PAYE) This is a method of collecting tax at source from individuals in gainful employment. Companies and Partnerships with employees are required to deduct tax according to the prevailing tax rates from their employees' salaries or wages on each payday for a month and remit the same to KRA on or before the 9th of the following month. c. Withholding Tax (WHT) This is a tax that is deductible from certain classes of income at the point of making a payment, to non-employees. WHT is deducted at source from the following sources of income: Interest Dividends Royalties Management or professional fees (including consultancy, agency or contractual fees) Commissions Pensions Rent received by non-residents Other payments specified Companies and partnerships making the payment, are responsible for deducting and remitting the tax to the Commissioner of Domestic Taxes. d. Advance Tax This is a tax paid in advance before a public service vehicle or a commercial vehicle goes for the annual inspection. e. Installment Tax Installment tax is paid by persons who have tax payable for any year that amounts to Kshs. 40,000 and above. 2. Rental Income Tax This is a tax charged on rental income received from renting out property. Taxation of rental income depends on how the rented property was used for residential or commercial purposes. All persons individuals, partnerships and companies that rent out property to other persons for either residential or commercial use are required to pay income tax on rent received To facilitate compliance, KRA appoints agents to withhold and pay, a percentage of the gross rent as tax. These agents can be verified via the agent checker on iTax. 3. Value Added Tax (VAT) Value Added Tax is charged on supply of taxable goods or services made or provided in Kenya and on importation of taxable goods or services into Kenya. While companies & partnerships can voluntarily register for VAT they MUST register if their annual revenue exceeds Kshs. 5,000, 000. To facilitate compliance, KRA appoints agents to withhold and pay, VAT on supplies made. These agents can be verified via the agent checker on iTax. 4. Excise Duty This is a duty of excise imposed on; goods manufactured in Kenya, or; imported into Kenya and specified in the 1st schedule to Excise Duty Act, 2015. Companies and Partnerships dealing in excisable good and services are required to pay excise duty. The List and types of Excisable goods and services are listed in the 5th Schedule as read together with Section 117 (1) (d) of the Customs and Excise Act, CAP 472 Laws of Kenya. They includes; Mineral water Juices, soft drinks Cosmetics and Preparations for use on hair Other beer made from malt Opaque beer Mobile cellular phone services Fees charged for money transfer among others 5. Capital Gains Tax (CGT) This is a tax chargeable on the whole of a gain which accrues to a company or an individual upon transfer of property situated in Kenya, whether or not the property was acquired before 1st January, 2015 . It took effect on 1st January 2015. 6. Agency Revenue This is a type of payment that KRA collects on behalf of various revenue collection agencies in Kenya. The two types of Agency Revenue include; Stamp Duty Betting and Pool Tax a. Stamp Duty Stamp duty is a tax charged on transfer of properties, shares and stock. It is collected by the Ministry of Lands, which has seconded the function to Kenya Revenue Authority (KRA). b. Betting Tax Betting Tax is chargeable on the gross gaming revenue (GGR) of a bookmaker at the rate of 15% as provided by Section 29A of the Betting, Lotteries and Gaming Act, 1966. Betting, gaming and Lottery businesses are required to withold as tax and remit to KRA 20% of the winnings being paid out to winners. Excise Duty on Betting is chargeable at the rate of 20% of the amount wagered or staked , commencing 7th November, 2019 . 6. Turnover Tax Turnover Tax is a tax charged on businesses whose gross turnover is more than Kshs. 1,000,000 but does not exceed or is not expected to exceed Kshs. 25, 000,000 during any year of Income. TOT is chargeable under Section 12 (C) of the Income Tax Act (CAP 470) Eligibility for Turnover Tax • Any resident person or corporate whose gross / expected turnover is more than Kshs. 1,000,000 but does not exceed or expected to exceed Kshs. 25,000,000 in any year of income is eligible for Turnover Tax. However, a person may elect, by notice in writing to the Commissioner, not to be taxable under TOT in which case the other provisions of the Income Tax Act shall apply to such a person. • A Turnover Tax registered taxpayer dealing in vatable supplies and has a turnover of Kshs. 5,000,000 and above is required to register for VAT as well. Exemptions under Turnover Tax regime Turn over tax shall not apply to-: a. Rental income b. Management or professional or training fees; and c. Any income which is subject to a final withholding tax under the Income Tax Act such as qualifying dividends or qualifying interests Additionally, Turnover tax does not apply to non-resident taxpayers. Benefits of Turnover Tax • Reduced record keeping expenses because TOT registered taxpayers are only required to keep daily gross sales records and daily purchase records. • Simplified filing and payment processes including payment through mobile phones – M-Service App • Reduced time for filing and paying taxes • Turnover Tax is a final tax • One is not required to file end of year Income Tax return on income subject to TOT What is the rate for Turnover Tax (TOT)? Turnover Tax is charged at the rate of 1% on gross monthly sales. Expenses are not deductible. This is a final tax. Registration for Turnover Tax Registration is done online through the iTax platform • Login to iTax using your PIN and password via https://itax.kra.go.ke • Click on Registration module, select ‘amend PIN details’ • Under section ‘A’ basic information click on yes under question ‘Do you want to register for TOT?’ • Under section ‘B’ Obligation details, select the date of registration of TOT and submit the application. Due date for filling and paying of TOT A person subject to turnover tax under this section shall submit a return and pay the tax due to the Commissioner on or before the twentieth day of the month following the end of the tax period. • Login to iTax , • Under the returns menu, select file return, then turnover tax and download the excel return, • Complete the return and submit, • After filing the return, go to the payment menu, select “payment”, select the amount payable, and generate a payment slip, Make the payment at a KRA partner bank or through M-PESA using the Government Pay bill number 222222, the Account Number is the Payment Registration number quoted at the top right corner of the generated payment slip. You can now also file and pay your TOT using the new KRA M-service App . Penalty and Interest for Turnover Tax • Late filing of TOT return attracts a penalty of KShs. 1,000. • Late payment penalty is 5% of the tax due. • Interest on unpaid tax is 1% of the tax due per month or part of a month. &#x1F4AC; Address Times Tower Building Haile Selassie Avenue P. O. Box 48240 - 00100 Helping Tax Payers iTax Tutorials Glossary FAQs Complaints Community Facts About KRA About KRA Who We Are KRA 9th Corporate Plan KRA Information Security Policy Data Privacy Statement Treaties & International Policy Exchange of Information KRA Quality Policy Statement Staff Mobile Application (iOS) Staff Mobile Application (Android) International Capacity Development Program (ICDP) KRA Service Charter Related Websites Annual Tax Summit The National Treasury KenInvest Public Financial Mgt Reforms --> Never miss a thing about KRA &copy; Kenya Revenue Authority 2026 | Privacy Policy | Terms and Conditions Enable JavaScript to ensure website accessibility Types of Taxes .rl_tooltips-link {border-bottom: 1px dashed #cccccc;} .rl_tooltips.popover {max-width: 400px;z-index: 10000;} a.flag {text-decoration:none;} a.flag img {vertical-align:middle;padding:0;margin:0;border:0;display:inline;height:16px;opacity:0.8;} a.flag:hover img {opacity:1;} a.flag span {margin-right:5px;font-size:15px;vertical-align:middle;}