SOURCE: https://www.kra.go.ke/individual/filing-paying/types-of-taxes/residential-rental-income

Rental Income Tax - KRA --> --> Home Individual PIN Registration Learn about KRA PIN --> About PIN Tax Obligations Requirements for Registration PIN Dormancy PIN Cancellation How to Print Your PIN Certificate. How to Register for a KRA PIN [Individual.] How to Register for a KRA PIN [Non-Individual.] How to Deregister your PIN as a Foreigner Requirements for PIN Deregistration of a Deceased Person Filing & Paying File & Pay --> Individual Income Tax Pay As You Earn (PAYE) Withholding Tax Tax Compliance Certificate (TCC) Installment Tax Advance Tax Rental Income Tax Capital Gains Tax Value Added Tax (VAT) Turnover Tax (TOT) Importing & Exporting Learn about Importation & Exportation --> Procedures for Motor Vehicle Other Goods How to Import Customs Bonds Special Needs Learn About Tax Exemption --> Persons With Disability Alternative Dispute Resolution(ADR) Learn About ADR --> About ADR Why ADR? Disputes appropriate for ADR The ADR Framework ADR Application Form Diaspora Affairs Learn about Kenyans Living Abroad --> KRA PIN & Tax Obligations Guidelines for Returning Residents Importation Diplomatic & First Arrival Privileges Legacy Ledger Reconciliation Migrated Ledger Balances --> Background of the Legacy Tax System How to Access the Migrated Data and Adjusting the Migrated Balances How and Where to get Support/Assistance Migrated Legacy System Credit Balances How to Re-validate and Reconcile Migrated Legacy System Balances Requirements for Taxpayer Reconciliation of Legacy System Ledger Balances Next Steps After Validation of Legacy System Ledger Balances Business Companies & Partnerships Taxation for Companies & Partnerships --> PIN Registration Types of Taxes Filing & Paying Taxes Incentives & Exemptions Importing & Exporting Import & Export Procedures Excise Duty Legacy Ledger Reconciliation Compliance & Penalties Learn About Compliance --> Tax Compliance Certificate Offences & Penalties Not-For-Profit Taxation for Not-For-Profit Organisations --> PIN Registration Types of Taxes and How to Comply Societies Taxation for Societies --> PIN Registration Types of Taxes Filing & Paying Taxes Incentives & Exemptions Authorized Economic Operators (AEO) Learn About AEO --> About AEO Benefits of AEO Eligibility & Getting Certified Alternative Dispute Resolution Learn About Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) --> About Alternative Dispute Resolution Why Alternative Dispute Resolution Disputes Eligible for ADR The Alternative Dispute Resolution Framework Apply for ADR eTIMS Learn About eTIMS --> What is eTIMS Types of eTIMS Solutions eTIMS System to System Integration How to Onboard on eTIMS Install eTIMS Buyer Initiated Invoicing eTIMS Contact and Support Details eTIMS Fuel Station System eTIMS Tutorials Investors Incentives & Certification Investing in Kenya --> Investment Certificate PIN Registration Investing in Kenya --> Local Investor Foreign Investor Tax Obligations Investment Procedures Investing in Kenya --> Procedures for Investing in Kenya Agents Customs Agent About Customs Agent --> Customs Agents Customs Agents Roles Become a Customs Agent Customs Licence Renewal Tax Agents About Tax Agents --> Who is a Tax Agent? Role of Tax Agents Become a Tax Agent Deregistration & Cancellation Online Services About Us E - Procurement Careers Publications News Centre KESRA Contact Us Your Location: --> A --> A A A About Us E - Procurement Careers Publications News Centre KESRA Contact Us Home Individual PIN Registration Learn about KRA PIN About PIN Tax Obligations Requirements for Registration PIN Dormancy PIN Cancellation How to Print Your PIN Certificate. How to Register for a KRA PIN [Individual.] How to Register for a KRA PIN [Non-Individual.] How to Deregister your PIN as a Foreigner Requirements for PIN Deregistration of a Deceased Person Filing & Paying File & Pay Individual Income Tax Pay As You Earn (PAYE) Withholding Tax Tax Compliance Certificate (TCC) Installment Tax Advance Tax Rental Income Tax Capital Gains Tax Value Added Tax (VAT) Turnover Tax (TOT) Importing & Exporting Learn about Importation & Exportation Procedures for Motor Vehicle Other Goods How to Import Customs Bonds Special Needs Learn About Tax Exemption Persons With Disability Alternative Dispute Resolution(ADR) Learn About ADR About ADR Why ADR? Disputes appropriate for ADR The ADR Framework ADR Application Form Diaspora Affairs Learn about Kenyans Living Abroad KRA PIN & Tax Obligations Guidelines for Returning Residents Importation Diplomatic & First Arrival Privileges Legacy Ledger Reconciliation Migrated Ledger Balances Background of the Legacy Tax System How to Access the Migrated Data and Adjusting the Migrated Balances How and Where to get Support/Assistance Migrated Legacy System Credit Balances How to Re-validate and Reconcile Migrated Legacy System Balances Requirements for Taxpayer Reconciliation of Legacy System Ledger Balances Next Steps After Validation of Legacy System Ledger Balances Business Companies & Partnerships Taxation for Companies & Partnerships PIN Registration Types of Taxes Filing & Paying Taxes Incentives & Exemptions Importing & Exporting Import & Export Procedures Excise Duty Legacy Ledger Reconciliation Compliance & Penalties Learn About Compliance Tax Compliance Certificate Offences & Penalties Not-For-Profit Taxation for Not-For-Profit Organisations PIN Registration Types of Taxes and How to Comply Societies Taxation for Societies PIN Registration Types of Taxes Filing & Paying Taxes Incentives & Exemptions Authorized Economic Operators (AEO) Learn About AEO About AEO Benefits of AEO Eligibility & Getting Certified Alternative Dispute Resolution Learn About Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) About Alternative Dispute Resolution Why Alternative Dispute Resolution Disputes Eligible for ADR The Alternative Dispute Resolution Framework Apply for ADR eTIMS Learn About eTIMS What is eTIMS Types of eTIMS Solutions eTIMS System to System Integration How to Onboard on eTIMS Install eTIMS Buyer Initiated Invoicing eTIMS Contact and Support Details eTIMS Fuel Station System eTIMS Tutorials Investors Incentives & Certification Investing in Kenya Investment Certificate PIN Registration Investing in Kenya Local Investor Foreign Investor Tax Obligations Investment Procedures Investing in Kenya Procedures for Investing in Kenya Agents Customs Agent About Customs Agent Customs Agents Customs Agents Roles Become a Customs Agent Customs Licence Renewal Tax Agents About Tax Agents Who is a Tax Agent? Role of Tax Agents Become a Tax Agent Deregistration & Cancellation Online Services EN SW --> --> --> --> --> --> --> File & Pay --> Home&nbsp/&nbsp Individual&nbsp/&nbsp Filing & Paying&nbsp/&nbsp File & Pay&nbsp/&nbsp Rental Income Tax &#xf02f; Individual Income Tax Pay As You Earn (PAYE) Withholding Tax Tax Compliance Certificate (TCC) Installment Tax Advance Tax Rental Income Tax Capital Gains Tax Value Added Tax (VAT) Turnover Tax (TOT) What is Rent? Rent means payments received from a right granted to another person for use or occupation of immovable property which includes premium or similar consideration received for the use or occupation of property. Overview of Monthly Rental Income (MRI) A simplified tax regime on residential rental income known as Residential Rental Income Tax (popularly known as Monthly Rental Income or MRI was introduced through the Finance Act 2015 and came into effect on 1st Jan 2016. Who is eligible for MRI? MRI is payable by a resident person (individual or company) on rental income accrued or derived in Kenya for the use or occupation of residential property. Following the enactment of the Finance Act 2020, MRI is applicable to persons earning rental income which is in excess of two hundred and eighty thousand shillings but does not exceed fifteen million shillings during any year of income. with effect from 1st January 2021. However, a person may elect, by notice in writing to the Commissioner, not to be taxable under MRI in which case the annual income tax regime shall apply to such a person. Property owners with rental income above Kshs. 15 million per year will be required to declare the rental income together with incomes from other sources (if any) while filing their annual income tax returns. What is the MRI tax rate? The rate of tax is 7.5%, effective 1 st January 2024, on the gross rent received and is final tax. No expenses, losses or capital deductions are allowed for deduction from the gross rent. Exemptions from MRI Rental income from commercial property Non-resident landlords Landlords who earn rental income in excess of 15,000,000 per year. APPOINTMENT OF RENTAL INCOME TAX AGENTS The Finance 2023 Act has introduced a provision for appointment of rental income tax agents for the purposes of collection and remittance of rental income tax to the Commissioner (effective 1 st July 2023.) The tax shall be charged at 7.5% effective 1 st January 2024 and remitted by the fifth working day after the deduction was made. Further, the Commissioner may revoke this appointment at any time. When is MRI Return and Payment Due? Where a person deducts MRI he shall within five working days after the deduction was made remit the amount so deducted to the Commissioner together with a return in writing of the payment of the amount of tax deducted. Are there penalties applicable to MRI? Late filing of MRI returns attracts a penalty of: 2,000 or 5% of the tax due; whichever is higher for individuals Kshs. 20,000 or 5% of the tax due; whichever is higher for body corporates Late payment penalty is 5% of the tax Late payment interest is 1% per month or part of the month. How to Register a Property for MRI Registration is done online via https://itax.kra.go.ke Under the registration tab , click on the very last option: Register Property Details. Click on next. There are two sections, section A that has auto-filled details of the landlord and section B, which should be filled by the taxpayer depending on the type of property. There are three options of property New property - for a taxpayer who has never registered any property even prior to this enhancement Update property - for updating property details. Deregister property - for taxpayers wishing to cancel already filled registration details After selecting the type of property, proceed to fill out a PIN of a tenant of the said property. The system will auto-populate the name of the taxpayer. Fill out the needed details depending on the selected option, and enter an “estimated monthly rental income” Then click on ‘add’. Enter any remarks under ‘Application Remarks’ and click on ‘Submit’. You will receive an ‘Acknowledgement Receipt’ for registered property details. How to file MRI Returns are submitted online via iTax https://itax.kra.go.ke Under the returns tab, click on ‘File Return’ Select the obligation “Income Tax - Rental Income” and click on There are two sections: Section A Select whether you are filing an Original Return or an Amended Return. Section B The total number of properties will be auto-populated based on the number of properties If for none, this field will need to be entered. Enter your monthly rental income. The Tax on rental income will be automatically computed. Where you have any rental withholding certificates and credits for the month in reference, the system will auto-populate. The tax due will also be calculated factoring in all the credits where any apply The final step is to click the ‘Submit ‘ button MRI is a final tax; therefore, persons are not required to declare the same in their annual income tax How to pay for MRI After filing the MRI return, generate a payment slip as follows; Payment registration number is generated through itax via https://itax.kra.go.ke Under the tab ‘Payments’, select ‘New Payment Registration’. Select the tax head as Income Tax and Tax sub-head as Income tax -rent. Select the payment type as Self-Assessment Tax where the return has already been filed and proceed to enter the tax periods (year and month). After selecting the radio button, click on the ‘Add’ button then select the payment mode as appropriate. Press ‘Submit’ and retrieve a unique payment registration number, which will be used for either mobile payments or payments through Gross Rent income for the year: Property A - 5 units*Kshs. 20,000*12months 1,200,000 Property B - 10 units*Kshs. 15,000*12months 1,800,000 Total Rent income in Kshs. 3,000,000 Less: Allowable expenses (Kshs.): Land Rent/Rates 10,000 Insurance 20,000 Agent's fees 30,000 Repairs 160,000 Loan interest 85,000 Electricity 60,000 Net taxable rent income (Kshs.) 2,635,000 How do I file for Residential Rental Income? Rental Income is filed on or before the 20 th of the following month. For example, rent received in January is declared and tax paid on or before 20 th February. Complete a monthly tax return online via iTax by declaring the gross rent and tax payable will be computed automatically at a rate of 10%. For any month that the landlord does not receive any rent he/she shall file a NIL return. Residential rental income is final tax therefore, persons are not required to declare the same in their annual income tax returns. You can now also file and pay your monthly rental income tax using the new KRA M-service App . &#x1F4AC; Address Times Tower Building Haile Selassie Avenue P. O. Box 48240 - 00100 Helping Tax Payers iTax Tutorials Glossary FAQs Complaints Community Facts About KRA About KRA Who We Are KRA 9th Corporate Plan KRA Information Security Policy Data Privacy Statement Treaties & International Policy Exchange of Information KRA Quality Policy Statement Staff Mobile Application (iOS) Staff Mobile Application (Android) International Capacity Development Program (ICDP) KRA Service Charter Related Websites Annual Tax Summit The National Treasury KenInvest Public Financial Mgt Reforms --> Never miss a thing about KRA &copy; Kenya Revenue Authority 2026 | Privacy Policy | Terms and Conditions Enable JavaScript to ensure website accessibility Rental Income Tax a.flag {text-decoration:none;} a.flag img {vertical-align:middle;padding:0;margin:0;border:0;display:inline;height:16px;opacity:0.8;} a.flag:hover img {opacity:1;} a.flag span {margin-right:5px;font-size:15px;vertical-align:middle;}